Welcome back. Well, I'm talking to
myself. Welcome back to me. I've had a
whole bunch of seminars at work and
actually the man flu. If you're
unfamiliar with the man flu, um it's
something that men get that's a lot
worse than anything that a woman would
have to experience. Um I like to
consider the comparison of child birth,
but worse. So, it's very fortunate that
women don't have to experience this. Um
so, I'm happy to take that on um for our
women, but that's what I've had. So,
it's been pretty bad. Either way, I've
had a month off training.
Please don't get upset women out there
and judge. Uh, anyhow, maybe I'm not.
Today is my first squat session back.
Forgot to put the mic on. Ah, [__] Life
has gotten in the way. Little bit of
sickness, little bit of work, but it's
been about a month since I've gotten
under a barbell and squatted.
I've been doing some work with the
little time that I've had, mostly leg
presses and exercises where I can just
get a little bit of volume in and go
about my day. My sessions have been very
short like this happens very frequently.
People do things like go on holidays or
get sick and have to take time off their
training. And a very common question
that I'm asked is how do I come back and
build back as much strength as possible
so that I can pick up where I left off,
airplane. And I'm going to show you my
favorite strategy that I use to build
back my strength as quickly as possible.
I have done upper body. I think upper
body is a pretty easy way to build back
strength. One of the biggest things that
I believe that you lose, especially if
you're a squatter, especially if you
love doing powerlifting style movements.
Uh if you're a bodybuilder and you do
tons of machines and all that stuff,
it's a lot easier. But one of the things
that you lose conditioning with with
your barbell movements is the spine
loading. So axial load is a thing that
you need to condition your body for. If
I haven't squatted heavy in a while and
I come under a barbell and it's heavy,
it's very very hard. As opposed to if
I'm on a nice long phase of barbell
squatting and I've been doing that for
for months. Typically I come under heavy
barbells and it's like I don't know what
the problem was. Why was I complaining
that it was so hard? This is easy. And
that's a big part of it. Your body may
be strong but the conditioning for that
spine load is just not there. So, that's
how it is when you take significant
amount of time off. Like I said, for me,
it's been about a month since I've done
a barbell squat. I just know what's
ahead of me, and that is if I try and go
heavy today, uh it's just not going to
work. It's going to feel terrible. It's
going to be disheartening, and uh it's
just going to throw me off. It's just
going to make me feel terrible. So,
whenever I take time off, I come in and
I just know that I'm not going to try
and push as hard as I can. But, I've got
this strategy that I've developed over
the years that works very, very well.
And I'm going to teach it to you, too. I
wouldn't call it wave loading strategy.
Wave load means you go up and down and
up and down. This one is just upwards.
So here's the strategy. I choose a
weight that I should be able to do for
about five reps. And I know that it's
going to be hard, but I should be able
to do it. It's like I know that's what
my general level of strength is. But
instead of coming in and just going
straight for five reps, it's kind of
like, you know, testing the waters. You
come in and you dip your toes in to see
how cold it is. I'm going to come in and
I'll do one set. The first set is going
to be a single to get a feel for that
weight. And then I'm going to have a a
rest period. My rest is probably going
to be around 4 to 5 minutes. And then
the next set I'm going to do a set of
two with the same weight. Rest four to 5
minutes. Come in, do a set of three with
the same weight. It's all the same
weight. Same rest. Come in set four.
Four reps. And then I finish on that set
of five. So the idea of it, and from
experience, the first set of one is
really, really hard because you're kind
of choosing a weight that you know you
can get, but you've lost the
conditioning for. So, you come in and
you do a heavy single and it's way
heavier than what you expected. Uh,
except I expect it because I've been
there, done that. I've been training for
over two decades at not the same level,
but you know, I've I've learned a lot in
that time. Um, and that's what I'm going
to do today. So, the first question we
ask is how heavy do we go? Well, before
this break, I was able to do, you know,
I don't want to say comfortably, but
sets of 220 kg for five reps. So there's
no way I expect to be at that level, but
I would love to get back to that level.
So what I consider is if you've taken
time off and you were able to do a
weight like that, so 220, um, you know,
I think I should be able to do 180 kg
for five. So that's what my goal is
today, right? I should be able to do it,
but I know it's hard and if I work
towards just coming in on set one, doing
a set of five on 180, it's going to feel
terrible. So I'm going to use that
strategy right now. You're going to
watch me warm up to a single of 180 and
then a double of 180, a triple four, and
then five. And that's going to be my
session hopefully. I don't know how it's
going to go. Uh, but you'll find out the
same time as me. I'm hoping that by the
time I come to the fifth set, I'm able
to do 180 kg for five.
Then I'm going to sit down and talk to
you guys how I'm going to create a
strategy to use that base level of
strength, which is five reps on 180 to
build back to my preh holiday,
pre-sickness, pre-break strength, which
is 220 kg for five. Let's get into it.
All right, so check me out with all my
equipment, all the gear, and no idea.
Uh, and a question that my videographer
asked is, "Are you using the belt
straight away?" Uh, I am, but not here.
So, I just have the belt on my entire
session and it's on the loosest setting.
So, it's not really on, but I just keep
it all of my equipment on.
Just I don't know. It's just what I do.
And then as I get heavier and heavier,
I go tighter and tighter with the
equipment.
I just did my last warm-up set. That was
160 kg for one. I record myself while
I'm doing it. You guys know that about
me. And something that I'm observing is
it looks really easy, but it doesn't
feel so easy cuz it's been a while. So
160, it really should be easy. But the
feeling that I have is when I unrackck
it, it's like it's a shock to my body.
It feels way heavier than what 160
should really feel like. So I'm
anticipating that 180 obviously is going
to feel heavy. Uh which is why I don't
want to do a set of five now. It feels
like it would be too heavy for me to do
it now. So anyway, that's why it's a
nice little reintroduction. I'm going to
do one rep and I'm anticipating that
it's going to feel heavy, but it
probably won't look as hard as it
probably look easy actually, but
probably won't feel easy. We'll see.
You know, it's hard to sound too
impressed by that lift. That should be
very easy for me. However, I expected it
to be hard kind of. It wasn't, you know,
easy, but it was easier than I expected.
So, we're off to a good start. Um, I
think I was even being a little bit
conservative when I said 180. So, I
think, you know, five reps on this I'm
going to do. But that's another part of
your first session back after a little
bit of time off is it should be
conservative. In my experience, here's
the next thing, especially when it comes
to squats. If you've taken significant
time off squatting, it doesn't matter
how heavy you go or how much volume you
do, the leg soreness the next day is way
more than what it normally is. So, a
question that Musty, my videographer,
asked me. He said, "Are we doing
accessories afterwards?" And I said,
"Not for quadriceps." That's the simple
answer. And that's my rule. No
accessories for quadriceps. Do the main
work for the quadriceps. Keep the volume
low. Keep the intensity low and then
walk away feeling like you could have
done more. Yes, I will do accessories,
but it's going to be opposing muscles.
So, I'll do hamstring curls because I'm
not going to be exhausted after this,
but I don't want to accumulate more
volume in my quadriceps after this
because I just know what'll happen is if
I do, I'll probably be in pain and it'll
interfere with my next sessions. It'll
interfere with my other training and I
don't like that soreness. muscle
soreness isn't the indication of a
successful session. Sometimes it's a
great indicator that you've hit the
target muscles. So sometimes people say
things like, you know, I just don't feel
it in my glutes or I don't feel my pecs
working when I'm doing this exercise.
And then, you know, I've got some
strategies where I give you specific
exercises that really target the glutes,
increase the volume, increase the
intensity so that you intentionally have
soreness in that particular muscle the
following day. So that you feel like,
oh, okay, now I understand that those
muscles are absolutely being used. And
it gives people the confidence that the
training is going in the right direction
and they're hitting the exact muscles
that they want to be hitting. That's
where muscle soreness, that's what I
consider as a great tool for where
muscle soreness is a successful
strategy. But apart from that, muscle
soreness doesn't mean you've achieved
more muscle hypertrophy. It didn't make
you build more muscle. A lot of people
think, and this is a bit of a myth
that's been debunked, that that muscle
damage, one of the main mechanisms of
muscle building or muscle hypertrophy,
where you do a session, the muscles
break down, that's what causes the pain,
and then they repair and get bigger.
That's a myth. The main mechanism of
muscle building is mechanical tension.
Airplane, and that's achieved by taking
a significant load to a close proximity
to failure. So, when you're doing a set
and you're starting to slow down because
those last few reps are getting really,
really hard, the closer you get to
failure, the more mechanical tension's
created. So, that's the tension. That's
the main mechanism of hypertrophy, not
the muscle damage. So, if you train
every session and you think that muscle
soreness is what you need to be working
towards, you don't. It's better to avoid
it if you can. For me, the rest time is
4 to 5 minutes. Um, I don't feel
fatigued. So when I'm going my super
super heavy sessions, I'm taking up to 8
minutes and I get so many comments where
people are saying, "How do you need 8
minutes and all these things?" Well,
when it comes to strength at high
levels, uh 8 minutes is an advantage.
Firstly, it's an advantage. It gives you
a full recovery, especially when you're
lifting super super heavy loads.
Secondly, if you're a powerlifter,
that's how long you're resting. 8 to 10
minutes usually. That's how long you're
resting in between attempts. You don't
have a timer saying, "Okay, I'm ready to
go." You go when the refs and the the
competition says you're going. So
usually if you've got like 10 lifters in
a flight, it takes on average about a
minute between each attempt. So every
lifter takes a minute to do their lift.
So if there's 10 lifters before you,
that's a 10-minute rest in between sets.
So those of you who think 10 minutes,
you're going to cool down and all these
things. Well, interestingly, that's not
what happens in powerlifting
competition. You don't cool down. That's
where people set world records. So
objectively, that much rest period,
especially at high levels, isn't too
much rest. and it can actually be very
beneficial. But today, I'm not maxing
out. I'm not going super heavy. I like
about four to five minutes rest.
easy.
>> Yeah, that felt comfortable.
>> Many people lose weight or lose weight
during their holidays and stuff like a
big difference in terms of lifting.
>> Yeah. So, weight loss, that's another
question. And funny you say that. Let's
go for a walk and see how much I weigh.
I've been intentionally being a little
bit more sensible with my calories that
I'm consuming because my output isn't as
high. The last month, I haven't been
training as hard as I normally have. So,
therefore, I haven't been consuming the
same amount of calories. Check that out.
99.5
with all of my equipment on no belt. But
I've got these knee sleeves and shoes
are pretty heavy. Man, that's the first
time I've been under 100 kg in I don't
remember. I don't remember many many
many years. So, did that affect my
strength? Absolutely. But I expect that,
you know, I'll be able to put it on very
quickly again. So, all I I know exactly
how to do it. I've restricted my
calories intentionally because I didn't
want to carry around or or put on body
fat while I was not training as hard.
So, I reduced my calories. But now that
I know that I am training again with
purpose and I have the time to allocate
to my weights training, I'll increase my
calories again. And I'm certain, you
know, I don't want to be that much more
than 100. I've been kind of in between
100 and kind of like 102. That's my
sweet spot. So right now that said 99.5
fully closed I would say you know first
thing in the morning I've had a whole
bunch of fluids as well. First thing in
the morning I'd say I'd be closer to you
know definitely a kilogram lighter than
that. So I'm in the 98s right now.
Therefore my strength definitely takes a
hit. If you lose weight it's not
guaranteed that all of that weight is
fat loss. So ideally you want it all to
be fat loss. But there's I'll tell you
right now there's I've lost some muscle.
I've lost some muscle, a little bit of
water, and of course, a little bit of
fat as well. Um, but yes, that
interferes with my performance, which is
another reason why I'm not coming in and
trying to push it and go as hard as I
can. That's how you set yourself up for
failure. And I don't like that feeling.
I want to set myself up conservatively.
I want to walk away from today's session
feeling like I could have done more. And
then this week, I'm sensible with my
nutrition. I eat a little bit more
calories. And then I come in next week
stronger. And that's when I'm going to
like right now I'm contemplating my
strategy for my program to get myself
back to 220 for five as soon as
possible. I do want to build back the
strength. There's a cool saying from uh
I believe the guy's name is Andre De
Shields and he says slowly is the
fastest way to get to where you want to
be. So a lot of the times people want to
rush when they come back. They want
their results real bad. And I get it. So
do I. But I understand the process and
as a result of coming in and pushing too
hard too fast, you know, if I have leg
soreness, it's going to interfere with
the rest of my training for the week.
I'm going to have an ineffective week.
So, in my experience, that principle
slowly is the fastest way to get to
where you want to be. Come in
conservative and allow room to take more
aggressive jumps from week to week. So,
if I'm here hitting 180 kg for five
today and it's comfortable, I know that
next week I'll be stronger because I'll
be eating to fuel for performance. So,
I'll be eating in a little bit of a
calorie surplus. 180 for five this week.
I could very easily see a road map where
I go 190 for five next week, 200 for
five the following week, 210 for five
the following week, and then on week
four back to where I was, 220 for five.
And that's in the scheme of things,
four-week program to get to where I was
before I left off. I think that's a
successful strategy. Set three.
Honestly, it's feeling easier and
easier.
>> It looks easier and easier.
>> Yeah. I feel like the last rep of each
set is just coming up. And I know I'll
tell you my thought process and it's
probably the same as you. It's like why
are you doing such light weight? That's
easy. I look at it's like I should have
gone heavier. No, that's the point.
Start conservative. Give yourself room
to progress. If you walk out of this
session feeling like you could have done
more, guess what you get to do next
week? You get to go more. Right? So now
I'm going to come in next week with
confidence that when I put 190 on that
bar, it's probably going to look very
similar, which is going to give me
confidence for the next week to do 200
and so on and so forth. That's the idea
of it. Set yourself up to be able to
progress. One of the biggest mistakes,
if you've been following me for long
enough, you know I keep on preaching
this. I consider this to be my hack for
long-term progression is to stop
training as hard as you can every single
time you come into the gym. I'm not
saying don't train to fail. Yes, train
to fail sometimes, not all the times.
Set yourself up with a strategy. And
what is that strategy? My strategy is a
four-weekly program where week one of
every program I start conservative. How
conservative? Roughly RP7. What does RP7
mean? It's subjective. And some of you
at home saying RP is wrong. It's
[__] I know nothing's perfect, but
roughly give yourself an average of kind
of like RP7. You could say that's three
reps in reserve on average. I'm walking
away feeling like I could have done
more. Next week, I work a little bit
harder. RP8, add a little bit of weight
to the bar. The next week, RP9. So, I'm
getting closer and closer to that
feeling of working to my limits on week
three. And then on week four, so my goal
is on week four to come in and hit that
220 and I'm planning for it to be pretty
tough. So that's my kind of like my send
it week. Come in and I hit the goal that
I like I wouldn't be able to do 220 for
five today. That's me overshooting it.
But in 4 weeks I'm confident like now
that I'm feeling this. It's like I just
know the process. In 4 weeks I'm pretty
confident that I'll be able to get the
220 for five on week four. Now here's
the next thing. I'm planning it for it
to be around RP 10. But guess what? If
it's RP 8 or 9, awesome, even better.
Then I come in for the next program with
a nice base, knowing that 220 for five
is easy peasy. And then I continue to
work forward. So it's better to be a
little bit conservative and have more in
the tank than to be a little bit greedy
and fail reps, break down technique, and
make it difficult to progress from week
to week. Next set, four reps. Set four.
It's feeling better and better every
set. Unrackcking the weight isn't a
shock anymore like it was on the first
set. My last warm up 160, unrackcking
the weight felt heavy on my body. But
now it's just, you know, I'm back in the
game. My body's, you know, conditioned
that quickly to accept weight and, you
know, spine load. Even though it's not
as heavy as I've been, everything's
going to plan. Well, not really. I
didn't know how it was going to end. I
didn't know if I was going to get five.
I didn't know if it was going to be
easy. I was pretty confident. It's like
I know I can get 180 for five, but I
thought it was going to be damn hard
because
I haven't done it in a while, but it was
damn easy. Okay.
Easy
day, man.
Could have done 10. So, that means I
undersshot it for sure. But I didn't
know what to expect. I just know that I
like to set myself up. So it is a
conservative session and that gives me a
ton of confidence to approach next week
go heavier and I know what to expect. So
probably been giving you the answers as
we've been speaking. So I think that's
what my strategy is going to be. 190 for
five is next week 200 for five the
following 210 the following and then on
week four is 220 for five. That's back
to where we were. Now how many sets of
five and all of those things? I mean
there's a few ways of doing it. You
know, at this level, I don't like,
Here's an interesting one. A typical
strength program is five sets of five.
And that's where I first started in my
journey for strength. The first time I
got strength programmed for me by a
strength coach, it was five sets of
five. And that was unfamiliar to me. I
was used to doing things like three sets
of eight or 10 or 12 bodybuilder style.
That's how I used to train. And then
when I saw 5x5, the rationale was, you
know, it's the same reps as, you know,
3x8, but instead of doing 3x8 on a
lighter weight, we do less reps and we
spread that load over multiple sets. So,
if anything, you're actually doing more
volume. And I looked at that, it's like,
wow, what a great way of training. Why
would you ever do sets of eight or 10
when you can do less reps, heavier load,
and then do more sets of it? And then I
got to the point, I mean, it wasn't that
strong then. So, back then, my 1 RM
would have been about 180 kg. So, I say
it wasn't that strong. still kind of
strong but not compared to now. Like
recently my best squats been 300 kg raw.
So that means with knee sleeps. Now um
very big difference at this level of
strength is the stronger you get. Here's
a rule that you can take to the bank.
The stronger you get, the less total
volume you should be performing because
every set is a lot more fatiguing. I'm a
lot better at recruiting more of my max
my high threshold motor units. So, my
nervous system is a lot more advanced
now that I'm a lot stronger than when I
was not as strong. And it's not as if
they just keep on getting stronger and
your energy levels are the same. You've
got a better ability to recruit your
muscle fibers or more a higher
percentage of your muscles and your
nervous system and therefore you're
stronger per repetition, but you have a
better ability of using more of your
body, which is fatiguing. So, the point
to what I'm saying is the stronger you
get, the less total volume you should be
performing. So, at the highest level,
you know, I typically don't get any of
my strength athletes doing more than
three sets of five on anything. And
quite commonly, it's even less than
that. Like, it's one to one to three
sets of five is the upper limit. And one
of my favorite strategies is actually a
top set back down set. Um, I don't know
what you're saying, Must
>> We have a full video about
>> Oh, right. Yeah, we got a full video on
top set back set. That's what he was
saying. He was doing that. I'm like, I
don't know what that means, brother.
Yeah, we've got a full video on top set
back down set, but I could very
comfortably say that that's all I really
need to do is a top set back down set of
uh, you know, one top set of five on on
190 with some accessory and other
exercise. And that's probably what I'm
going to do. Top set, back down set. And
there's a lot of strategies with the
backown sets as well, such as a lighter
weight of the same style of exercise.
And another strategy that I have is you
do the top set with the really high
heavy demanding exercise and then your
back down work is just accessory
exercises. So something that I love is
stiletto squats. So I could do top set
of five of my low bar squat which is you
know the heavy work and then I'll do
back down work on on stiletto squats. So
top set of five 190 and then maybe three
by five on a stiletto squat or two sets
of five on a stiletto squat with a
significantly lighter load which is
probably what I'm going to do anyway.
That's enough. This is the session. It's
one to five. Try that if you've ever
taken significant time particularly for
lower body. So squats and deadlift. This
program works very well. Upper body,
it's not the same thing. You're not as
shocked when you come under a heavier
load. You're not as strong obviously,
but it's not the same feeling. I am
going to do accessories, but I'm not
going to touch my quads. I'm going to do
hamstring curls. And that's all. I'm
walking away knowing that I could have
done more. And then next week, I'm going
to start reintroducing a few more
quadricep accessories because right now,
you know, I think I'll walk in, you
know, tomorrow I'll have a little bit of
tenderness in my legs. But you saw the
degree of ease that I performed. I know
that I'm not going to be limping around
because I did too much work. And if I
could give you any recommendation, it
would be that week one. If you've taken
significant time off from direct
quadricep work, it's just one of those
muscles that the pain is just not worth
it. I did bench press 2 days ago and I'm
tight, as you can see, getting under the
barbell. That's what makes me especially
tight uh for a low bar squat. But I did
a little bit more volume than what I did
today because the pec soreness isn't
debilitating, but certain muscles like
the quadriceps is debilitating. Don't
let it interfere with successful
sessions in the week. So, I know that
I'll come into my deadlift day feeling
pretty good, feeling pretty fresh,
actually. Uh, so anyway, without further
ado, I'm going to do some hamstring
curls. I'll probably do three sets of
eight. Nothing crazy. And you don't need
to watch that. So, that's me done. I
hope you enjoyed today's session. If
you're not already subscribed to me,
click subscribe and click like and all
of those things so that you can get more
value. All I do is come in here and talk
about my sessions and all of the tips
and secrets that I use to build
strength. Uh if you don't know who else
I've worked with, I've I'm the coach for
Thor Beans to put it simply. I've
coached many highle athletes with
different sports as well. Rugby, MMA,
UFC fighters. Uh but I guess the most
accomplished athlete is the world's
strongest man. I'm a strength coach and
I've coached the strongest man on the
planet. So, so that's kind of why you
should listen to me. Anyway, hope you
enjoyed today's session. See you next
time. But there's a difference with the
tapering. It's tight around the knee and
it flares up for the quad and flares out
for the for the calf, which I prefer.
Oh, you want to see the barbell mark?
So, this is something that I uh um was
regretting. I didn't even think about
it. I thought I'm going to wear, you
know, my sleeveless, which come and
check this out. This is uh my new Alco
barbell. Now, this is a powerlifting
bar. And if you felt this uh
this is a weightlifting bar and the
difference between the two is the
aggressive knurling, so it's a lot more
grippy. This is smoother barbell. So,
having this on your skin is totally
fine. Having this on your skin can rip
you up. But lucky it was a light
session. So, when I go super heavy,
there's a little bit more bar movement.
It slides a little bit. I try and stick
it into my back as hard as I can, but
when it's heavier, sometimes it just
moves a little bit. When there's more
weight moving just a little bit, it'll
it'll rip your skin off. So, I don't
know.
>> You tell me. Is there any
>> Is there red marks on the back of the
delts? Yeah, there you go. I mean, it
feels okay, but if if I went heavier
than that, usually I just do t-shirts.
That's my recommendation. If you're
going to do low bar squats, use
t-shirts. I was going to ask you a
question. Like,
>> yeah, bro.
>> If someone doesn't listen to you and
they [__] failed their first session,
man.
>> Yeah.
>> Like, how do you
>> All right, that's a good question
because it happens a lot and it's
happened to me before and you're not a
bad person if that's you. But that's
where I've created this strategy to
teach people to start conservative,
which a lot of people have to build
trust. It's like, no, I'm not training
hard enough to get results. I'm I'm
going to go backwards and all this. No,
you're not. But anyway, if that does
happen, so this is where I consider it
to be an error and this is why a lot of
people plateau. So, what happens if you
fail the first session? There's a few
things, like let's just use this weight
as an example. What would I have done
today if 180 was too much for five reps?
Well, I'd reset my following four weeks.
That's the first thing that I'll do. I'd
say that's too heavy, and I guess 220 on
the final week isn't the number that I'm
going for. So, I'm just going to have to
reset my expectations. So, I lower my
expectations. So, we've got two options.
One, what do I do next week? Try I mean,
depends on how hard it was. try and do
the same weight but actually not miss
the reps. So that's one approach which
I'm not a huge fan of. I'm not I'm not a
huge fan of any of the approaches but
these are the approaches that I would
take. So choose the same weight and try
not to fail on the next week. You know
the problem with that is I know it's
going to be hard. I know it's going to
be a high RP which means if I do that
same weight and don't fail the following
week, where do I go to the week after
that? I know it's going to be a struggle
every week. I'm going to come in and
struggle. The alternative is to come in
next week with a reduced load and start
again. So I'd say if I failed 180 on
week one, I'd say that was way too
heavy. Don't fail. Leave repetitions in
reserve. I'd come back next week and go
maybe 160 and then go one. So set myself
up again to start conservative 160 170
and then on week three come in and
reattempt that 180 and then week four go
for a 190. So they're the two options.
Neither of them I like. My preference is
to start conservative in the first
place, which takes experience, I guess,
to and a little bit of maturity to
understand that you don't have to be
going to failure, especially on these
big movements. Now, here's another
thing. A lot of people say you should be
training failure every session. Now,
that's something that I talk a lot about
is every exercise comes with a different
profile. And here's a recommendation
that you can take with you to make sure
that you succeed moving forward. If
you're doing a barbell squat, bench
press, deadlift, these big, heavy free
weight exercises, leave a rep to three
in reserve every time you do it. And
then if you're fearful that you're going
to miss out on some gains by not going
to failure, use accessory exercises to
go to failure. So, I'm not going to do
more quad work. You know that I'm not.
Uh, but I would go, okay, cool. I had
plenty of repetitions in reserve. Let's
use accessory exercises like our leg
press or even a leg extension and take
those movements to failure. What's going
to happen? What's the worst that could
happen if I take those movements to
failure? Not much. I mean, you know, leg
press, I don't want to say that it's
impossible to injure yourself on a leg
press, but I usually use reps of about,
you know, 12 reps and upwards on a leg
press. And that has a very low risk of
injury. And there's pretty much no risk
of technical breakdown in any of the
machine exercises. There's a lot of risk
of technical breakdown in your free
weight exercises. This is where the
skill is. You want to refine the skill
with good technique. There's not much
skill in leg press. There's not much
skill in leg extension. So different
rules apply for different exercises.
Free weight exercises, leave repetitions
in reserve. Still work hard, but leave
repetitions in reserve. And then if you
fear that you're not getting the most
out of your session because you're not
taking anything to fail, choose
accessory exercises that are far less
complex, like machine work. Take them to
fail all you like. You're fine. I've had
a really successful session. I've done
great sets. I can walk away saying,
"Good. I'll move forward next week.
Anything I do on top of this is a
bonus." I guess that's a long-winded uh
answer to your simple question which was
what if we fail on week one. So let's
come back to what that answer is. If you
fail on week one, what are your options
for week two? Repeat the same weight and
try not to fail. That's hard and I don't
like it but that's one option. And then
if that's you I would say okay let's try
and do this. And then and then on the
next phase I'm going to say do you
remember how I told you to go
conservative last phase? Do you believe
me now? So this is the communication
that I have with the athletes that I
work with. It's not always a matter of
do as I say because I know it's a
confidence thing. A lot of people coming
in, they're not confident to say, I'm
going to leave repetitions in reserve.
So, we're working with humans. It's
like, okay, cool. Let's try it your way.
Let's try and work hard and see what
happens. You failed. So, are you willing
to try my way now, which is let's go a
little bit more conservative and usually
it's a little bit more convincing when
that happens. So, then the option two,
which I also don't like, is to come back
the next week a few steps back and redo
that, which means week one was a waste
of time. It taught you a lesson that
you're not as strong as what you thought
you were and you should listen to your
coach.
>> Listen to the best coach.
>> Ah, he's all right. He's all right.
Anyway, there's your answer. I hope that
answered your question.
>> There's people out there that hate.
There's always haters. That's fine.
It was going to be 18 minutes. It's 36
minutes.
>> Sure.
[__]